So we're almost in a position to make our higher or lower hap.
But we're going to need a way to test whether or not the number that the user has entered is indeed
higher or lower than the number that the phone is thinking of.
So let's find out how we can do that.
I'm going to create a new term of code here and then we'll just save it as if statement is
there we go.
So as you might imagine an if statement is a way of testing whether it's whether a certain statement
is true and if it is then then doing something as a result if you've done if statements or any kind
of programming really in any other programming language you'll be very familiar with this set up and
it's not that different in Java as it is anywhere else.
So you could start off with something like if and then we use again parentheses to contain our statement.
So if we had something very straightforward Something like to is greater than one.
So that's a statement that is most definitely true.
Then we might print
to is greater than one simple as that.
So we're just testing for a statement to be true.
And if it is then we do something as a result.
So let's just check that we get to is indeed greater than one.
If I change that to a test to see if two was less than 1 then nothing happens because that's not true.
So this is all well and good but not particularly useful if we're just using on statements that are
always true or false.
So normally we would use in conjunction with some kind of a variable.
So let's say for example we've found out the age of our user and they are 21 and we want to test whether
or not this particular user is older or younger than 18.
So how do you think we do that.
Pretty straightforward.
We just say if age is greater than or equal to 18
and for now we'll just change the print to user is over 18.
There we go.
So that is obviously true for this particular user.
If we change them to be 16 then it ceases to be true.
Now it may well be that we want to do something if the user is not over 18 so maybe show them a message
or something like that and to do that we would use the else command like that.
So essentially we're testing if something is true if it is.
We do that thing.
If it isn't then we run this chunk of code here.
So
user is under 18 would be the obvious
choice.
Here we go.
There we go.
So user is under 18.
So that's the else statement which can be very useful if we want to test for one or two or more different
options.
I'm just going to get rid of that and could you do a test to see if the user was equal to the age of
18.
OK.
This was a little bit of a trick question.
If you've done programming before you might well have seen what I was after but what I was trying to
trick you into doing is something like that.
So if age is equal to 18 then print the user is 18 looks fine right.
Let's just start it and take a look.
We've got all sorts of problems now that doesn't work and that's because what we're actually doing in
this command here is setting the variable age equal to 18.
So we're not testing whether or not it's equal to 18 with setting it equal to 18.
So to separate out the setting of variables equal to something and testing whether or not it's equal
to something we use the double equals sort of age and then double equals 18 then this will work.
So now let's just check it out.
So nothing happens.
That's good because the user isn't 18 or 16.
If we now set them to be 18 and run that again we get user is 18.
So if you haven't seen that before if you are new to programming that's a really common area that if
you just put a single equals there you'll get an error when you try and compile your code if you want
to test whether something is equal to something else you need to use the double the calls.
So just one more thing to show you with if statements is we saw the else command a moment ago but we
can combine that with another if statement so maybe we want to check that either the user is 18 or older
than 18 or they younger than 18.
So if we want to check that we might want to check the 18 first and if they're not then we do another
check or else if age is less than or less than 18.
So if that's the case then we might print user is under 18
and then the only other option
is that the user
is over 18
There we go.
So you can have a number of different IF statements all linked together in this way to check for different
possibilities.
And that's about all there is to it.
What I want you to do as a quick challenge is to make sure that you've got everything clear is to create
an array with two integers in it and write an IF statement to test whether the second integer is greater
than the first.
And if it is display something to the logs if it isn't display something as simple as that therefore
it
all right that way.
Well I'm just going to run through how I would have done it.
So to create a array of integers we use it and then square brackets.
And I'm just going to choose two
integers like that.
There we go.
And so I wanted to check whether the second one was bigger than the first.
I've managed to forget an actual name for my array.
I'll call it numbers.
So the second element in the numbers array is accessed by numbers 1.
Because remember it's 0 and then 1 so that's greater than the first numbers.
Zero.
Then
you get the system out
and the second number is greater
and the only other option
or is it
system how to print in the first number
is greater.
There we go.
So your code may have looked quite a bit like that if we go so we've got the second number is greater.
So it seems to work fine.
But I wonder if you fell into my little trap and if you end up with two numbers which are the same in
your array it's going to say that the first number is greater because I did strictly greater than their
rather than greater than or equal to.
So really I needed three options because either the second number is greater or the first number of
great is greater or they the same.
So to make this completely correct I should use a second check to check whether numbers
0 8 is greater than numbers 1
and then there's a final option.
And there really are only three possible options now.
So I don't need to do a check this last time around system.
Print line.
The numbers are the same.
And let's just check.
There we go.
So there was a bit of a trick on my part that I didn't mention the possibility that they could be the
same but I hope you managed to do at least the first part.
And if you managed to spot there's that option as well then congratulations.
Excellent.
So now we've covered if statements and we're in a position to make our extremely exciting higher or
lower app See you in the next video.